{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2578
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 EPILOGUE\
\
CHAPTER ONE\
\
SIBERIA. ON THE BANKS of a broad solitary river stands a town, one of the administrative centers of Russia; in the town there is a fortress, and in the fortress there is a prison. In the prison the second-class convict Rodion Raskolnikov has been confined for nine months. Almost a year and a half has passed since his crime.\
\
There had been little difficulty about his trial. The criminal adhered exactly, firmly and clearly to his statement. He did not confuse or misrepresent the facts, or soften them in his own interest, or omit the smallest detail. He explained every incident of the murder, the secret of the pledge (the piece of wood with a strip of metal) which was found in the murdered woman\'92s hand. He described minutely how he had taken her keys, what they were like, as well as the chest and its contents; he explained the mystery of Lizaveta\'92s murder; described how Koch and, after him, the student knocked, and repeated all they had said to one another; how afterwards he had run downstairs and heard Nikolai and Dmitri shouting; how he had hidden in the empty apartment and afterwards gone home. He finished by indicating the stone in the yard off the Voznesensky Prospect under which the purse and the trinkets were found. The whole thing, in fact, was perfectly clear. The lawyers and the judges were very much struck, amongst other things, by the fact that he had hidden the trinkets and the purse under a stone, without making use of them, and that, what was more, he did not now remember what the trinkets were like, or even how many there were. The fact that he had never opened the purse and did not even know how much was in it seemed incredible. It turned out to hold three hundred and seventeen rubles and sixty kopecks. Because it had been lying under the stone for so long, some of the most valuable notes had suffered from the damp. They spent a long while trying to discover why the accused man should tell a lie about this when he had made a truthful and straight forward confession about everything else. Finally some of the lawyers more versed in psychology admitted that it was possible he had really not looked into the purse and so didn\'92t know what was in it when he hid it under the stone. But they immediately deduced that the crime could only have been committed through temporary mental derangement, through homicidal mania, without any purpose or pursuit of gain. This fell in with the most recent fashionable theory of temporary insanity, so often applied nowadays in criminal cases. Moreover Raskolnikov\'92s hypochondriac condition was proved by many witnesses, by Dr. Zossimov, his former fellow students, his landlady and her servant. All this pointed bly to the conclusion that Raskolnikov was not quite like an ordinary murderer and robber, but that there was another element in the case.\
\
To the intense annoyance of those who maintained this opinion, the criminal scarcely attempted to defend himself. To the decisive question as to what motive impelled him to the murder and the robbery, he answered very clearly with the coarsest frankness that the cause was his miserable position, his poverty and helplessness, and his desire to provide for his first steps in life by the help of the three thousand rubles he had reckoned on finding. He had been led to the murder through his shallow and cowardly nature, exasperated moreover by poverty and failure. To the question what led him to confess, he answered that it was his heartfelt repentance. All this was almost coarse . . .\
\
The sentence however was more merciful than could have been expected, perhaps partly because the criminal had not tried to justify himself, but had rather shown a desire to exaggerate his guilt. All the strange and peculiar circumstances of the crime were taken into consideration. There could be no doubt of the abnormal and poverty-stricken condition of the criminal at the time. The fact that he had made no use of what he had stolen was put down partly to the effect of remorse, partly to his abnormal mental state at the time of the crime. Incidentally, the murder of Lizaveta served in fact to confirm the last hypothesis: a man commits two murders and forgets that the door is open! Finally, the confession, at the very moment when the case was hopelessly muddled by the false evidence given by Nikolai through melancholy and fanaticism, and when, moreover, there were no proofs against the real criminal, no suspicions even (Porfiry Petrovich fully kept his word) \'97 all this did much to soften the sentence. Other circumstances, too, in the prisoner\'92s favor came out quite unexpectedly. Razumikhin somehow discovered and proved that while Raskolnikov was at the university he had helped a poor consumptive fellow student and had spent his last penny on supporting him for six months, and when this student died, leaving a decrepit old father whom he had maintained almost from his thirteenth year, Raskolnikov had got the old man into a hospital and paid for his funeral when he died. Raskolnikov\'92s landlady bore witness, too, that when they had lived in another house at Five Corners, Raskolnikov had rescued two little children from a house on fire and was burnt in doing so. This was investigated and fairly well confirmed by many witnesses. These facts made an impression in his favor.\
\
And in the end the criminal was in consideration of extenuating circumstances condemned to penal servitude in the second class for a term of eight years only.\
\
At the very beginning of the trial Raskolnikov\'92s mother fell ill. Dunia and Razumikhin found it possible to get her out of Petersburg during the trial. Razumikhin chose a town on the railway not far from Petersburg, so as to be able to follow every step of the trial and at the same time to see Avdotia Romanovna as often as possible. Pulcheria Alexandrovna\'92s illness was a strange nervous one and was accompanied by a partial derangement of her intellect.\
\
When Dunia returned from her last interview with her brother, she had found her mother already ill, in feverish delirium. That evening Razumikhin and she agreed what answers they must make to her mother\'92s questions about Raskolnikov and made up a complete story for her mother\'92s benefit that he had to go away to a distant part of Russia on a business commission, which would eventually bring him money and renown.\
\
But they were struck by the fact that Pulcheria Alexandrovna never asked them anything on the subject, neither then nor thereafter. On the contrary, she had her own version of her son\'92s sudden departure; she told them with tears how he had come to say goodbye to her, hinting that she alone knew many mysterious and important facts, and that Rodia had many very powerful enemies, so that it was necessary for him to be in hiding. As for his future career, she had no doubt that it would be brilliant when certain sinister influences could be removed. She assured Razumikhin that her son would one day be a great statesman, that his article and brilliant literary talent proved it. She read this article continually, she even read it aloud, almost took it to bed with her, but scarcely asked where Rodia was, though the subject was obviously avoided by the others, which might have been enough to awaken her suspicions.\
\
They began to be frightened at last at Pulcheria Alexandrovna\'92s strange silence on certain subjects. She did not, for instance, complain that she never received any letters from him, though in previous years she had lived solely on the hope of letters from her beloved Rodia. This was a cause of great uneasiness to Dunia; the idea occurred to her that her mother suspected that there was something terrible in her son\'92s fate and was afraid to ask, for fear of hearing something still more awful. In any case, Dunia saw clearly that her mother was not in full possession of her faculties.\
\
Once or twice, however, Pulcheria Alexandrovna gave such a turn to the conversation that it was impossible to answer her without mentioning where Rodia was, and on receiving unsatisfactory and suspicious answers she immediately became gloomy and silent. Such moods would last for a long time. Dunia saw at last that it was hard to deceive her and came to the conclusion that it was better to be absolutely silent on certain points; but it became more and more evident that the poor mother suspected something terrible. Dunia remembered her brother telling her that her mother had overheard her talking in her sleep on the night after her interview with Svidrigailov and before the fatal day of the confession: had she not understood something from that? Sometimes days and even weeks of gloomy silence and tears would be followed by a period of hysterical animation, and the invalid would begin to talk almost incessantly of her son, of her hopes of his future . . . Her ideas were sometimes very strange. They humored her, pretended to agree with her (she saw perhaps that they were pretending), but she still went on talking.\
\
Five months after Raskolnikov\'92s confession, he was sentenced. Razumikhin and Sonia saw him in prison as often as possible. At last the moment of separation came. Dunia swore to her brother that the separation should not be for ever, Razumikhin did the same. Razumikhin, in his youthful ardor, had firmly resolved to lay the foundations at least of a secure livelihood during the next three or four years, save up a certain sum and emigrate to Siberia, a country rich in every natural resource and in need of workers, active men and capital. There they would settle in the town where Rodia would be living and begin a new life together. They all wept when they parted.\
\
Raskolnikov had been very dreamy for a few days before. He asked a great deal about his mother and was constantly anxious about her. He worried so much about her that it alarmed Dunia. When he heard about his mother\'92s illness he became very gloomy. With Sonia he was particularly reserved all the time. With the help of the money left to her by Svidrigailov, Sonia had long ago made her preparations to follow the party of convicts in which he was dispatched to Siberia. Not a word passed between Raskolnikov and her on the subject, but both knew that was how it would be. At their final parting he smiled strangely at his sister\'92s and Razumikhin\'92s fervent anticipations of their happy future together when he would come out of prison. He predicted that their mother\'92s illness would soon end fatally. At last, Sonia and he set off.\
\
Two months later Dunia was married to Razumikhin. It was a quiet and sorrowful wedding; Porfiry Petrovich and Zossimov, however, were invited. During this whole period Razumikhin wore an air of resolute determination. Dunia implicitly believed he would carry out his plans and indeed she could not but believe in him. He displayed a rare strength of will. Among other things he began attending university lectures again in order to take his degree. They were continually making plans for the future; both counted on settling in Siberia within five years at least. Until then they rested their hopes on Sonia.\
\
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was delighted to give her blessing to Dunia\'92s marriage with Razumikhin; but after the marriage she became even more melancholy and anxious. To give her pleasure Razumikhin told her how Raskolnikov had looked after the poor student and his decrepit father and how a year ago he had been burnt and injured in rescuing two little children from a fire. These two pieces of news excited Pulcheria Alexandrovna\'92s disordered imagination almost to ecstasy. She talked about them continually, even entering into conversation with strangers in the street, though Dunia always accompanied her. In public conveyances and stores, wherever she could capture a listener, she would start talking about her son, his article, how he had helped the student, how he had been burnt in the fire, and so on. Dunia did not know how to restrain her. Apart from the danger of her morbid excitement, there was the risk of someone recalling Raskolnikov\'92s name and speaking of the recent trial. Pulcheria Alexandrovna found out the address of the mother of the two children her son had saved and insisted on going to see her.\
\
At last her restlessness reached an extreme point. She would sometimes begin to cry suddenly and was often ill and feverishly delirious. One morning she declared that by her reckoning Rodia should soon be home, that she remembered when he said goodbye to her he said that they must expect him back in nine months. She began to prepare for his arrival, began to do up her room for him, to clean the furniture, to wash and put up new hangings and so on. Dunia was anxious, but said nothing and helped her to arrange the room. After a fatiguing day spent in continual fantasies, in joyful daydreams and tears, Pulcheria Alexandrovna was taken ill in the night and by morning she was feverish and delirious. It was brain fever. She died within a fortnight. In her delirium she dropped hints which showed that she knew a great deal more about her son\'92s terrible fate than they had supposed.\
\
For a long time Raskolnikov did not know of his mother\'92s death, though a regular correspondence had been maintained from the time he reached Siberia. It was carried on by means of Sonia, who wrote every month to the Razumikhins and received replies with unfailing regularity. At first they found Sonia\'92s letters dry and unsatisfactory, but later on they came to the conclusion that the letters could not be better, since from these letters they received a complete picture of their unfortunate brother\'92s life. Sonia\'92s letters were full of the most matter of fact detail, the simplest and clearest description of all Raskolnikov\'92s surroundings as a convict. There was no word of her own hopes, no predictions for the future, no description of her feelings. Instead of any attempt to interpret his state of mind and inner life, she gave the simple facts \'97 that is, his own words, an exact account of his health, what he asked for at their interviews, what commission he gave her and so on. All these facts she gave with extraordinary minuteness. The picture of their unhappy brother stood out at last with great clarity and precision.\
\
There could be no mistake, because nothing was given but facts.\
\
But Dunia and her husband could derive little comfort from the news, especially at first. Sonia wrote that he was constantly sullen and unready to talk, that he scarcely seemed interested in the news she gave him from their letters, that he sometimes asked after his mother and that when, seeing that he had guessed the truth, she told him at last of her death, she was surprised to find that he did not seem greatly affected by it, not externally at any rate. She told them that, although he seemed so wrapped up in himself and, as it were, shut himself off from everyone, he took a very direct and simple view of his new life; that he understood his position, expected nothing better for the time being, had no ill-founded hopes (as is so common in his position) and scarcely seemed surprised at anything in his surroundings, which were so unlike anything he had known before. She wrote that his health was satisfactory; he did his work without shirking or seeking to do more; he was almost indifferent about food, but, except on Sundays and holidays, the food was so bad that at last he had been glad to accept some money to have his own tea every day. He begged her not to trouble about anything else, declaring that all the fuss only annoyed him. Sonia wrote further that in prison he shared the same room with the rest, that she had not seen the inside of their barracks, but concluded that they were crowded, miserable and unhealthy; that he slept on a plank bed with a rug under him and was unwilling to make any other arrangement. But that he lived so poorly and roughly, not from any intention or plan, but simply from inattention and indifference.\
\
Sonia wrote simply that he had at first shown no interest in her visits, had almost been irritated with her for coming; he had even been rude to her and unwilling to talk. But in the end these visits had become a habit and almost a necessity for him, and he was positively distressed when she was ill for several days and could not come to see him. She used to meet him on holidays at the prison gates or in the guard-room, to which he would be brought for a few minutes to be with her. On working days she would go to see him at work either at the workshops or at the brick kilns, or at the sheds on the banks of the Irtysh.\
\
About herself, Sonia wrote that she had succeeded in making some acquaintances in the town, that she sewed and, as there was scarcely a dressmaker in the vicinity, she was looked upon as an indispensable person in many houses. But she did not mention that the authorities were, through her, interested in Raskolnikov; that his task was lightened and so on.\
\
At last the news came (Dunia had indeed noticed signs of alarm and uneasiness in the preceding letters) that he had remained aloof from everyone, that his fellow prisoners did not like him, that he kept silent for days at a time and was becoming very pale. In the last letter Sonia wrote that he had been taken very seriously ill and was in the convict ward of the hospital.\
\
CHAPTER TWO\
\
HE WAS ILL FOR a long time. But it was not the horrors of prison life, not the hard labor, the bad food, the shaven head, or the patched clothes that crushed him. What did he care for all those trials and hardships! He was even glad of the hard work. Physically exhausted, he could at least count on a few hours of quiet sleep. And what did the food matter to him, the thin cabbage soup with beetles floating in it? In the past as a student he had often not had even that. His clothes were warm and suited to his way of life. He did not even feel the chains. Was he ashamed of his shaven head and his prison coat? In whose presence? In Sonia\'92s? Sonia was afraid of him, how could he feel ashamed in her presence? And yet he was even ashamed when he came to see Sonia, because of which he tortured her with his rough, contemptuous manner. But it was not his shaven head and his chains he was ashamed of: his pride had been stung to the quick. It was wounded pride that made him ill. Oh, how happy he would have been if he could have blamed himself! He could have endured anything then, even shame and disgrace. But he judged himself severely, and his exasperated conscience found no particularly terrible fault in his past, except a simple blunder which might happen to anyone. He was ashamed just because he, Raskolnikov, had so hopelessly, stupidly come to grief through some decree of blind fate, and must humble himself and submit to \'93the idiocy\'94 of a sentence in order somehow to find peace.\
\
Vague and aimless anxiety in the present, and in the future a continual sacrifice leading to nothing \'97 that was all that lay before him. And what comfort was it to him that at the end of eight years he would be only thirty-two and able to begin a new life! What did he have to live for? What did he have to look forward to? Why should he strive? To live in order to exist? He had been ready a thousand times before to give up existence for the sake of an idea, for a hope, even for a whim. Mere existence had always been too little for him; he had always wanted more. Perhaps it was just because of the strength of his desires that he had considered himself a man to whom more was permissible than to others.\
\
And if only fate would have sent him repentance \'97 burning repentance that would have torn his heart and robbed him of sleep, that repentance, the awful agony of which brings visions of hanging or drowning! Oh, he would have been glad of it! Tears and agonies would at least have been life. But he did not repent of his crime.\
\
At least he might have found relief in raging at his stupidity, as he had raged at the grotesque blunders that had brought him to prison. But now in prison, in freedom, he thought over and criticized all his actions again and by no means found them as blundering and as grotesque as they had seemed at the fatal time.\
\
\'93In what way,\'94 he asked himself, \'93was my theory more stupid than others that have swarmed and clashed from the beginning of the world? You only have to look at the thing entirely independently, broadly, and uninfluenced by commonplace ideas, and my idea will by no means seem so . . . strange. Oh, skeptics and halfpenny philosophers, why do you halt halfway!\'94\
\
\'93Why does my action strike them as so horrible?\'94 he said to himself. \'93Is it because it was a crime? What is meant by crime? My conscience is at rest. Of course, it was a legal crime, of course, the letter of the law was broken and blood was shed. Well, punish me for the letter of the law . . . and that\'92s enough. Of course, in that case many of the benefactors of mankind who snatched power for themselves instead of inheriting it ought to have been punished at their first steps. But those men succeeded and so they were right, and I didn\'92t, and so I had no right to have taken that step.\'94\
\
It was only in that that he recognized his criminality, only in the fact that he had been unsuccessful and had confessed it.\
\
He suffered from another question: why had he not killed himself ? Why had he stood looking at the river and preferred to confess? Was the desire to live so b and was it so hard to overcome it? Had not Svidrigailov overcome it, although he was afraid of death?\
\
In his misery he asked himself this question and could not understand that, at the very time he had been standing looking into the river, he had perhaps been dimly conscious of the fundamental falsity in himself and his convictions. He didn\'92t understand that that consciousness might be the promise of a future crisis, of a new view of life and of his future resurrection.\
\
He preferred to attribute it to the dead weight of instinct which he could not step over, again through weakness and meanness. He looked at his fellow prisoners and was amazed to see how they all loved life and prized it. It seemed to him that they loved and valued life more in prison than in freedom. What terrible agonies and privations some of them, the tramps for instance, had endured! Could they care so much for a ray of sunshine, for the primeval forest, the cold spring hidden away in some unseen spot, which the tramp had marked three years before, and longed to see again, as he might to see his sweetheart, dreaming of the green grass round it and the bird singing in the bush? As he went on he saw even more inexplicable examples.\
\
In prison, of course, there was a great deal he did not see and did not want to see; he lived as it were with downcast eyes. It was loathsome and unbearable for him to look. But in the end there was much that surprised him and he began, as it were involuntarily, to notice much that he had not suspected before. What surprised him most of all was the terrible, impossible gulf that lay between him and all the rest of them. They seemed to be a different species, and he looked at them and they at him with distrust and hostility. He recognized and understood the reasons for his isolation, but he would never have admitted until then that those reasons were so deep and b. There were some Polish exiles, political prisoners, among them. They simply looked down upon everyone else and treated them like ignorant fools; but Raskolnikov could not look upon them like that. He saw that these ignorant men were in many respects far wiser than the Poles. There were some Russians who were just as contemptuous, a former officer and two seminarians.\
\
Raskolnikov saw their mistake as clearly. He was disliked and avoided by everyone; they finally even began to hate him \'97 why, he could not tell. Men who had been guilty of far greater offenses despised and laughed at his crime.\
\
\'93You\'92re a gentleman,\'94 they used to say. \'93You shouldn\'92t hack about with an axe; that\'92s not a gentleman\'92s work.\'94\
\
The second week in Lent, his turn came to take the sacrament with his gang. He went to church and prayed with the others. A quarrel broke out one day, he did not know how. Everyone fell on him at once in a fury.\
\
\'93You\'92re an infidel! You don\'92t believe in God,\'94 they shouted. \'93You ought to be killed.\'94\
\
He had never talked to them about God or his belief, but they wanted to kill him because he was an infidel. He said nothing. One of the prisoners rushed at him in an absolute frenzy. Raskolnikov awaited him calmly and silently; his eyebrows did not quiver, his face did not flinch. The guard succeeded in intervening between him and his assailant, or there would have been bloodshed.\
\
There was another question he could not resolve: why were they all so fond of Sonia? She did not try to win their favor; she rarely met them, only occasionally coming to see him at work, and even then only for a moment. And yet everybody knew her, they knew that she had come out to follow him, knew how and where she lived. She never gave them money, did them no particular service. Only once, at Christmas, did she send them all presents of pies and rolls. But by degrees closer relations sprang up between them and Sonia. She would write and post letters for them to their relations. Relations of the prisoners who visited the town, at their instructions, left presents and money for them with Sonia. Their wives and sweethearts knew her and used to visit her. And when she visited Raskolnikov at work, or met a party of the prisoners on the road, they all took off their hats to her. \'93Little mother Sofia Semionovna, you are our dear, good little mother,\'94 coarse branded criminals said to that frail little creature. She would smile and bow to them and everyone was delighted when she smiled. They even admired her gait and turned round to watch her walking; they admired her too for being so little, and, in fact, did not know what to admire her most for. They even came to her for help with their illnesses.\
\
He was in the hospital from the middle of Lent until after Easter. When he was better, he remembered the dreams he had had while he was feverish and delirious. He dreamt that the whole world was condemned to a terrible strange new plague that had come to Europe from the depths of Asia. Everyone was to be destroyed except a few chosen ones. Some sort of new microbe was attacking people\'92s bodies, but these microbes were endowed with intelligence and will. Men attacked by them became instantly furious and mad. But never had men considered themselves so intellectual and so completely in possession of the truth as these sufferers, never had they considered their decisions, their scientific conclusions, their moral convictions so infallible. Whole villages, whole towns and peoples were driven mad by the infection. Everyone was excited and did not understand one another. Each thought that he alone had the truth and was wretched looking at the others, beat himself on the breast, wept, and wrung his hands. They did not know how to judge and could not agree what to consider evil and what good; they did not know who to blame, who to justify. Men killed each other in a sort of senseless spite. They gathered together in armies against one another, but even on the march the armies would begin attacking each other, the ranks would be broken and the soldiers would fall on each other, stabbing and cutting, biting and devouring each other. The alarm bells kept ringing all day long in the towns; men rushed together, but why they were summoned and who was summoning them no-one knew. The most ordinary trades were abandoned, because everyone proposed their own ideas and their own improvements, and they could not agree. The land too was abandoned. Men met in groups, agreed on something, swore to keep together, but at once began on something quite different from what they had proposed. They accused one another, fought and killed each other. There were conflagrations and famine. All men and all things were involved in destruction. The plague spread and moved further and further. Only a few men could be saved in the whole world. They were a pure chosen people, destined to found a new race and a new life, to renew and purify the earth, but no-one had seen these men, no-one had heard their words and their voices.\
\
Raskolnikov was worried that this senseless dream haunted his memory so miserably, that the impression of this feverish delirium persisted so long. The second week after Easter had come. There were warm bright spring days; in the prison ward the grating windows under which the sentinel paced were opened. Sonia had only been able to visit him twice during his illness; each time she had to obtain permission, and it was difficult. But she often used to come to the hospital yard, especially in the evening, sometimes only to stand a minute and look up at the windows of the ward.\
\
One evening, when he was almost well again, Raskolnikov fell asleep. When he awoke he happened to go to the window, and at once saw Sonia in the distance at the hospital gate. She seemed to be waiting for someone. Something almost stabbed his heart at that moment. He shuddered and moved away from the window. The next day Sonia did not come, nor the day after; he noticed that he was expecting her uneasily. At last he was discharged. On reaching the prison he learnt from the convicts that Sofia Semionovna was lying ill at home and was unable to go out.\
\
He was very uneasy and sent a message to inquire after her; he soon learnt that her illness was not dangerous. Hearing that he was anxious about her, Sonia sent him a penciled note, telling him that she was much better, that she had a slight cold and that she would come soon, very soon and see him at work. His heart throbbed painfully as he read it.\
\
Again it was a warm bright day. Early in the morning, at six o\'92clock, he went off to work on the river bank, where they used to pound alabaster and had a kiln for baking it in a shed. There were only three of them who were sent. One of the convicts went with the guard to the fortress to fetch a tool; the other began getting the wood ready and laying it in the kiln. Raskolnikov came out of the shed on to the river bank, sat down on a heap of logs by the shed and began gazing at the wide deserted river. From the high bank a broad landscape opened before him, the sound of singing floated faintly audible from the other bank. In the vast steppe, bathed in sunshine, he could just see, like black specks, the nomads\'92 tents. There there was freedom, there other men were living, utterly unlike those here; there time itself seemed to stand still, as though the age of Abraham and his flocks had not passed. Raskolnikov sat gazing, his thoughts passed into daydreams, into contemplation; he thought of nothing, but a vague restlessness excited and troubled him. Suddenly he found Sonia beside him; she had come up noiselessly and sat down at his side. It was still quite early; the morning chill was still sharp. She wore her threadbare old wrap and the green shawl; her face still showed signs of illness, and it was thinner and paler. She gave him a joyful, welcoming smile, but held out her hand with her usual timidity. She was always timid about holding out her hand to him and sometimes did not offer it at all, as though she were afraid he would repel it. He always took her hand as if with repugnance, always seemed irritated to meet her and was sometimes obstinately silent throughout her visit. Sometimes she trembled before him and went away deeply upset. But now their hands did not part. He stole a rapid glance at her and dropped his eyes on the ground without speaking. They were alone, no-one had seen them. The guard had turned away for the time being.\
\
How it happened he did not know. But all at once something seemed to seize him and fling him at her feet. He wept and threw his arms round her knees. At first instant she was terribly frightened and she turned pale. She jumped up and looked at him trembling. But at the same moment she understood, and a light of infinite happiness came into her eyes. She knew and had no doubt that he loved her above everything else and that at last the moment had come . . .\
\
They wanted to speak, but could not; tears stood in their eyes. They were both pale and thin; but those sick pale faces were bright with the dawn of a new future, of a full resurrection into a new life. They were renewed by love; the heart of each held infinite sources of life for the heart of the other.\
\
They resolved to wait and be patient. They had another seven years to wait, and what terrible suffering and what infinite happiness before them! But he had risen again and he knew it and felt it in his whole being, while she \'97 she lived through him alone.\
\
On the evening of the same day, when the barracks were locked, Raskolnikov lay on his plank bed and thought of her. He had even imagined that day that all the convicts who had been his enemies looked at him differently; he had even started talking to them and they answered him in a friendly way. He remembered that now, and thought it was bound to be so. Wasn\'92t everything now bound to be changed?\
\
He thought of her. He remembered how continually he had tormented her and wounded her heart. He remembered her pale, thin little face. But these recollections scarcely troubled him now; he knew with what infinite love he would now repay all her sufferings. And what were all the agonies of the past! Everything, even his crime, his sentence and imprisonment, seemed to him now in the first rush of feeling an external, strange fact with which he had no concern. But he could not think of anything for long that evening, and he could not have analyzed anything consciously; he was simply feeling. Life had stepped into the place of theory and something quite different would work itself out in his mind.\
\
Under his pillow lay the New Testament. He took it up mechanically. The book belonged to Sonia; it was the one from which she had read the raising of Lazarus to him. At first he was afraid that she would worry him about religion, would talk about the gospel and pester him with books. But to his great surprise she had not once approached the subject and had not even offered him the Testament. He had asked her for it himself not long before his illness and she brought him the book without a word. Until now he had not opened it.\
\
He did not open it now, but one thought passed through his mind: \'93Can her convictions not be mine now? Her feelings, her aspirations at least . . . \'94\
\
She too had been greatly agitated that day, and at night she was taken ill again. But she was so happy \'97 and so unexpectedly happy \'97 that she was almost frightened of her happiness. Seven years, only seven years! At the beginning of their happiness at some moments they were both ready to look on those seven years as though they were seven days. He did not know that the new life would not be given him for nothing, that he would have to pay dearly for it, that it would cost him great striving, great suffering.\
\
But that is the beginning of a new story \'97 the story of the gradual renewal of a man, the story of his gradual regeneration, of his transition from one world into another, of his initiation into a new, unknown life. That might be the subject of a new story, but our present story is over.- \'97\
\
THE END\
\
F. M. Dostoevsky, 1868\
\
\
\
F. M. Dostoevsky, 1880\
\
\
\
INSPIRED BY CRIME AND PUNISHMENT\
\
Sigmund Freud and Psychoanalysis\
\
Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis, remarked in a letter to his friend, the writer Stefan Zweig, that \'93Dostoevsky cannot be understood without psychoanalysis . . . he illustrates it himself in every character and every sentence.\'94 Freud regarded Dostoevsky as one of the greatest literary psychologists in history, second only to Shakespeare. As a psychoanalyst, Freud attempted to unearth and identify the myriad submerged voices and desires in the unconscious of his patients. Crime and Punishment mirrors this process by probing the multiple and often contradictory motivations in the mind of Raskolnikov.\
\
Rather than trying to discover who committed a crime, as a detective or mystery novel might do, Crime and Punishment asks a more complex question: Why did Raskolnikov commit murder? No previous novel had so relentlessly sought the motivation for a character\'92s action. Raskolnikov identifies a number of possible reasons for the murder \'97 he needed money; he wanted to rid the world of a \'93louse\'94; he wanted to prove he was above society\'92s definitions of duty and conscience \'97 noting as well that his act was prompted by pent-up rage, a response to his feelings of powerlessness, and his alienation from the community.\
\
Porfiry Petrovich, the police official investigating the murders, takes an interest in easing Raskolnikov\'92s tormented psyche. Rather than forcing a confession, which he believes would not be beneficial, Porfiry uses conversation to help the murderer discover some of his hidden motivations. The prototype of literary detectives who are fluent in criminal psychology, Porfiry is also the first counselor to offer another character a \'93talking cure\'94 \'97 a nickname for psychoanalysis.\
\
Freud often said that \'93the poets\'94 discovered the unconscious before he did. Like Freud, Dostoevsky saw tremendous significance in dreams as manifestations of the unconscious. When Raskolnikov murders the pawnbroker, it is not in a state of lucidity and rationality, but in a dream-like trance, demonstrating Freud\'92s later premise that dreams contain desires too difficult to express in waking life.\
\
Dostoevsky\'92s The Brothers Karamazov was the subject of Freud\'92s essay \'93Dostoevsky and Parricide\'94 (1928), which analyzed the Russian writer\'92s psychology. In this article, which many find deeply flawed, Freud attempts to locate the guilt Dostoevsky felt regarding the death-wish he held for his father, who was murdered by his serfs when Dostoevsky was eighteen. Freud believed that the Oedipus complex was the fundamental human drama, and saw it as no coincidence that three masterpieces of world literature \'97 Hamlet, Oedipus Rex, and The Brothers Karamazov \'97 each centered on the murder of a father.\
\
The \'dcbermensch\
\
Raskolnikov is a familiar literary and philosophical type: the intellectually gifted but socially disconnected student who views himself as above society and its law. In creating Raskolnikov \'97 neither the first nor the last such character, though perhaps the best known \'97 Dostoevsky was influenced by novelist Ivan Turgenev and literary critic Dimitry Pisarev. In Turgenev\'92s Fathers and Sons (1862), Bazarov, a student, espouses radical, nihilistic views about society and feels he is superior to those around him. Pisarev, in his essay \'93Bazarov,\'94 published the same year, exalts the character\'92s disregard for the law and proposes that, for the most exceptional members of society, murder is always an option. This character type also forms the basis of Rope, Alfred Hitchcock\'92s 1948 film about a \'93perfect\'94 murder; the story is loosely based on a real-life slaying by two University of Chicago students, Nathan Leopold and Richard Loeb.\
\
The concept of the \'fcbermensch (German for \'93overman\'94) has frequently been used to explain the character of Raskolnikov. Friedrich Nietzsche first developed the idea in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, a highly influential philosophical work published in multiple parts in the 1880s. In it, the philosopher Zarathustra comes to earth to urge mankind to emulate the \'fcbermensch, a hypothetical individual Zarathustra sees as the pinnacle of human potential. The \'fcbermensch possesses a will so b that he is completely self-determining. He ignores the morality and prejudices of society, overcomes disease, and disdains the false security of religion. He sublimates his baser human desires, such as the sex drive, to ber, more creative outlets, such as art and philosophy.\
\
Raskolnikov puts forward a similar idea of the \'93extraordinary man\'94 in his article \'93On Crime,\'94 which Porfiry has read, and uses his \'93extraordinary man\'94 theory to justify his murder of the pawnbroker during his conversations with Porfiry. However, Raskolnikov lacks the primary quality Nietzsche identifies in the \'fcbermensch: the superhuman will to power. Raskolnikov performs his societal transgression not as a powerful act of will, but with a monomania that makes the murder practically involuntary. Raskolnikov also lacks the independence from religion and unimpeachable health of the \'fcbermensch.\
\
While Nietzsche had not read Crime and Punishment before writing Thus Spoke Zarathustra, he later came to admire the work greatly. In an odd convergence of art and real life, in 1889 he acted out one of Crime and Punishment\'92s most memorable scenes. Incoherent and emotionally disabled, Nietzsche, witnessing the mistreatment of a horse in Turin, Italy, ran to the animal and took it in his arms. His action echoed Raskolnikov\'92s dream (in chapter five of part one) in which a young boy kisses the lips and eyes of a bloody horse beaten by the drunken Mikolka. The episode in Turin was the dramatic beginning of the complete mental breakdown that defined the final decade of Nietzsche\'92s life.\
\
Existentialism\
\
Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus, French writers associated with the diverse philosophical movement known as existentialism, were heavily influenced by the work of Dostoevsky. An exploration of freedom from external laws and its incumbent angst connects the work of the three writers, and forms the basis of the existentialist discussion.\
\
In his 1946 lecture \'93Existentialism Is a Humanism,\'94 Sartre calls a line spoken by Ivan Karamazov in The Brothers Karamazov \'97 \'93If God does not exist, everything is permitted\'94 \'97 the \'93starting point\'94 of all existentialist thought. Sartre insists that a person\'92s actions can never be explained by human nature or determinism; rather, he posits, man is perpetually free to do what he likes and therefore is responsible for all his actions. Sartre\'92s short novel Nausea (1938) and his philosophical work Being and Nothingness (1943) are central documents of existentialism.\
\
Crime and Punishment depicts Raskolnikov agonizing over questions of motive and responsibility that Sartre eventually addresses with existentialism: Why did he commit his murder? Should he be punished for it? Are some men more free than others? By the end of the novel, Raskolnikov has not found a good reason for having murdered the pawnbroker. Instead, he repents his crime, seeking solace in God. Raskolnikov does not discover the existential truth \'97 that there was no good reason for killing her \'97 which may have provided him some comfort.\
\
In his essay \'93The Myth of Sisyphus,\'94 published in 1942, Camus confronts the problems inherent in the discovery that life cannot be explained in terms of reason. He rejects both religion, such as that in which Raskolnikov believed, and suicide as responses to that terrible discovery. Instead, he believes that embracing the absurdity of human life is the key to finding happiness. He fleshes out this notion in his short novel The Stranger (1942), in which the main character lives as he pleases because the world refuses to provide him with meaning. Like Raskolnikov, Mersault commits a senseless murder; once on trial, he refuses to provide any motive for his deed, illustrating the existentialist argument that it is irrational to attempt to affix meaning to actions. Awaiting execution, he realizes that his life has meant nothing and neither will his death. The certainty of death and meaning lessness frees Mersault from the burden of hope, and he is happy.\
\
Dostoevsky\'92s early novella Notes from the Underground also figures heavily in the history of existentialist thought, with some scholars calling it the founding document. In it, the solitary Underground Man attacks determinism and finds meaning in freedom, while also acknowledging the suffering freedom causes.\
\
Crimes and Misdemeanors, by Woody Allen\
\
Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989) is Woody Allen\'92s most successful attempt at blending a dramatic plot with a comedic one. The serious or \'93crimes\'94 storyline revolves around an upper-middle-class ophthalmologist, Judah Rosenthal, played masterfully by Martin Landau. Publicly honored for his contributions to science and humanity, Judah is a fake, and he knows it. Not only has he rejected his father\'92s Jewish faith; he has also managed hospital funds in a less-than-ethical way and is having an affair with Dolores, a flight attendant played with frantic pathos by Angelica Houston. It is possible to see Judah, who is possessed of a self-serving illusion of superiority and distance from the \'93real world,\'94 as a modern-day Raskolnikov. As his mistress becomes increasingly upset and threatens to expose Judah\'92s indiscretions, Judah calls on his brother (Jerry Orbach), who has mob connections, to orchestrate a hit on her.\
\
Judah avoids punishment, but in a way that comments on Dostoevsky\'92s novel. In the coda, Judah meets the documentary film director Cliff (Allen\'92s familiar on-screen persona, who has been at the heart of the comic or \'93misdemeanors\'94 plot line) at a wedding party. Under the pretence of talking about a movie idea, the two have an existential discussion concerning the possible consequences \'97 spiritual and punitive \'97 of committing murder. Judah, now happy, relates his own real-life experience, framing it as idle conjecture: What if, he poses to Cliff, after the initial agonizing pangs of remorse the guilt \'93just went away\'94? In this intriguing film, Woody Allen reconceptual izes Dostoevsky\'92s themes within the context of today\'92s faithless, comfort-seeking world \'97 and, in effect, turns Crime and Punishment\'92s outcome on its head. Without morality and a firm sense of God, ideas and processes like punishment, forgiveness, and redemption prove to be pointless.\
\
COMMENTS & QUESTIONS\
\
In this section, we aim to provide the reader with an array of perspectives on the text, as well as questions that challenge those perspectives.The commentary has been culled from sources as diverse as reviews contemporaneous with the work, letters written by the author, literary criticism of later generations, and appreciations written throughout the work\'92s history. Following the commentary, a series of questions seeks to filter Fyodor Dostoevsky\'92s Crime and Punishment through a variety of points of view and bring about a richer understanding of this enduring work.\
\
Comments\
\
LEO TOLSTOY\
\
I wish I had the power to say all that I think of Dostoevsky! When you inscribed your thoughts, you partly expressed mine. I never saw the man, had no sort of direct relations with him; but when he died, I suddenly realized that he had been to me the most precious, the dearest, and the most necessary of beings. It never even entered my head to compare myself with him. Everything that he wrote (I mean only the good, the true things) was such that the more he did like that, the more I rejoiced. Artistic accomplishment and intellect can arouse my envy; but a work from the heart \'97 only joy. I always regarded him as my friend, and reckoned most confidently on seeing him at some time. And suddenly I read that he is dead. At first I was utterly confounded, and when later I realized how I had valued him, I began to weep \'97 I am weeping even now.\
\
\'97 from a letter to A. N. Strachov,\
\
translated by Ethel Colburn Mayne (1881)\
\
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON\
\
\'93Raskolnikoff \'94 is easily the greatest book I have read in ten years; I am glad you took to it. Many find it dull: Henry James could not finish it: all I can say is, it nearly finished me. It was like having an illness. James did not care for it because the character of Raskolnikoff was not objective; and at that I divined a great gulf between us, and, on further reflection, the existence of a certain impotence in many minds of to-day, which prevents them from living in a book or a character, and keeps them standing afar off, spectators of a puppet show. To such I suppose the book may seem empty in the centre; to the others it is a room, a house of life, into which they themselves enter, and are tortured and purified. The Juge d\'92Instruction I thought a wonderful, weird, touching, ingenious creation: the drunken father, and Sonia, and the student friend, and the uncircumscribed, protoplasmic humanity of Raskolnikoff, all upon a level that filled me with wonder: the execution also, superb in places. Another has been translated \'97 \'93Humili\'e9s et Offens\'e9s.\'94 It is even more incoherent than \'93Le Crime et le Ch\'e2timent,\'94 but breathes much of the same lovely goodness, and has passages of power, Dostoieffsky is a devil of a swell, to be sure.\
\
\'97 from a letter to J. A. Symonds (spring 1886)\
\
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE\
\
Dostoevsky [is] the only psychologist, incidentally, from whom I had something to learn; he ranks among the most beautiful strokes of fortune in my life. \'97 from Twilight of the Idols (1889)\
\
WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS\
\
It used to be one of the disadvantages of the practice of romance in America, which Hawthorne more or less whimsically lamented, that there were so few shadows and inequalities in our broad level of prosperity; and it is one of the reflections suggested by Dostoevsky\'92s novel, The Crime and the Punishment, that whoever struck a note so profoundly tragic in American fiction would do a false and mistaken thing \'97 as false and as mistaken in its way as dealing in American fiction with certain nudities which the Latin peoples seem to find edifying.\
\
\'97 from Criticism and Fiction (1891)\
\
MAURICE BARING\
\
In 1866 came \'93Crime and Punishment,\'94 which brought Dostoevsky fame. This book, Dostoevsky\'92s \'93Macbeth,\'94 is so well known in the French and English translations that it hardly needs any comment. Dostoevsky never wrote anything more tremendous than the portrayal of the anguish that seethes in the soul of Raskolnikov, after he has killed the old woman, \'93mechanically forced,\'94 as Professor Br\'fcckner says, \'93into performing the act, as if he had gone too near machinery in motion, had been caught by a bit of his clothing and cut to pieces.\'94 And not only is one held spellbound by every shifting hope, fear, and doubt, and each new pang that Raskolnikov experiences, but the souls of all the subsidiary characters in the book are revealed to us just as clearly; the Marmeladov family, the honest Razumihin, the police inspector, and the atmosphere of the submerged tenth in St. Petersburg \'97 the steaming smell of the city in the summer. There is an episode when Raskolnikov kneels before Sonia, the prostitute, and says to her: \'93It is not before you I am kneeling, but before all the suffering of mankind.\'94 That is what Dostoevsky does himself in this and in all his books; but in none of them is the suffering of all mankind conjured up before us in more living colours, and in none of them is his act of homage in kneeling before it more impressive.\
\
\'97 from An Outline of Russian Literature (1914)\
\
JOHN COWPER POWYS\
\
The first discovery of Dostoievsky is, for a spiritual adventurer, such a shock as is not likely to occur again. One is staggered, bewildered, insulted. It is like a hit in the face, at the end of a dark passage; a hit in the face, followed by the fumbling of strange hands at one\'92s throat. Everything that has been forbidden, by discretion, by caution, by self-respect, by atavistic inhibition, seems suddenly to leap out of the darkness and seize upon one with fierce, indescribable caresses. All that one has felt, but has not dared to think; all that one has thought, but has not dared to say; all the terrible whispers from the unspeakable margins; all the horrible wreckage and silt from the unsounded depths, float in upon us and overpower us . . .\
\
Dostoievsky\'92s Russians are cruelly voluble, but their volubility taps the evil humour of the universal human disease. Their thoughts are our thoughts, their obsessions, our obsessions. Let no one think, in his vain security, that he has a right to say: \'93I have no part in this morbidity. I am different from these poor madmen.\'94\
\
The curious nervous relief we experience as we read these books is alone a sufficient vindication. They relieve us, as well as trouble us, because in these pages we all confess what we have never confessed to anyone. Our self-love is outraged, but outraged with that strange accompaniment of thrilling pleasure that means an expiation paid, a burden lightened. Use the word \'93degenerate,\'94 if you will. But in this sense we are all \'93degenerates,\'94 for thus and not otherwise is woven the stuff whereof men are made.\
\
\'97 from Visions and Revisions: A Book of Literary Devotions (1915)\
\
PRINCE PETER KROPOTKIN\
\
The favourite themes of Dostoy\'e9vskiy are the men who have been brought so low by the circumstances of their lives, that they have not even a conception of there being a possibility of rising above these conditions. You feel moreover that Dostoy\'e9vskiy finds a real pleasure in describing the sufferings, moral and physical, of the down-trodden \'97 that he revels in representing that misery of mind, that absolute hopelessness of redress, and that completely broken-down condition of human nature which is characteristic of neuro-pathological cases. By the side of such sufferers you find a few others who are so deeply human that all your sympathies go with them; but the favourite heroes of Dostoy\'e9vskiy are the man and the woman who consider themselves as not having either the force to compel respect, or even the right of being treated as human beings. They once have made some timid attempt at defending their personalities, but they have succumbed, and never will try it again. They will sink deeper and deeper in their wretchedness, and die, either from consumption or from exposure, or they will become the victims of some mental affection \'97 a sort of half-lucid lunacy, during which man occasionally rises to the highest conceptions of human philosophy \'97 while some will conceive an embitterment which will bring them to commit some crime, followed by repentance the very next instant after it has been done.\
\
\'97 from Ideals and Realities in Russian Literature (1915)\
\
D. H. LAWRENCE\
\
They are great parables, the novels, but false art. They are only parables. All the people are fallen angels \'97 even the dirtiest scrubs. This I cannot stomach. People are not fallen angels, they are merely people.\
\
\'97 on Dostoevsky, from a letter to J. Middleton Murray\
\
and Katherine Mansfield (February 17, 1916)\
}